JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
Often lost in the health care
debate are the individual
stories of fear and
uncertainty that come
with a medical diagnosis.
Elizabeth Silver is
an author and attorney
who was unexpectedly
plunged into a world
of statistics and probability.
She offers her Humble Opinion
on how to consider a prognosis.
ELIZABETH SILVER, Author, "The
Tincture of Time": When my
daughter was six weeks old,
she suffered a serious stroke
and spent two weeks in the
neonatal intensive care unit.
As new parents, my husband
and I spent that time beside
her, waiting for answers and,
at the end, were given very few.
At home, with a single click,
we could watch videos, read
articles, and, most importantly,
stumble across numbers
that would send us either
rejoicing or panicking.
Like many parents, we
had nothing to hold
onto but statistics.
According to one I read, her
stroke carried a 20 percent
chance of death and 90 percent
chance of severe
neurological damage.
I focused on the 90 percent,
and imagined very different
versions of our lives.
Over the next year, as we
weaved in and out of doctors'
offices, I recalled the aphorism
that physicians are
supposed to treat the
patient, not the paper.
Hippocrates, the ancient Greek
philosopher and physician,
said that it is more important
to know what sort of person
has a disease than to know
what sort of disease a person
has.
In other words, we must
remember that patients
are people with stories.
I took a step back and began
looking at these statistics,
these abstract medical studies
and numbers, and started to
view them just as I would
a story, a novel or a film.
After all, a statistic is only
a particular version of a story.
And, as with all
stories, there are always
multiple perspectives
and multiple truths.
You can analyze them
like literature: When
was that statistic taken?
Who was the source group?
Was it self-selecting?
What else do the
subjects have in common?
When looking at a statistic
in a medical study,
you don't have the full
picture of your prognosis,
unless you have every
perspective, every
detail in the story.
And that is something you
will never get from a number.
Three years later, my daughter
escaped all her damning
statistics and is living a full,
happy life, as if
it never happened.
When I look closer at her
story in its totality,
those statistics didn't
differentiate based
on age, my prenatal
care, or even the actual
size of the stroke.
We all know that statistics
are useful, but if we rely on
them with too much weight, this
can only lead to a breakdown
of trust with medicine.
We end up focusing on the 90
percent chance of things going
wrong, and, in the process,
neglect the 10 percent
chance of things going right.
Perhaps my daughter's story
might one day be counted in a
future study, and her success
will serve as a tick
against those frightening,
bigger numbers, because
there is an alternate
ending that includes
the full picture, and
it can be beautiful.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Elizabeth Silver.